.TH FENSTERCHEF 1 "2.0" "Fensterchef" "Fensterchef manual"
.SH NAME
fensterchef - tiling done the right way
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fensterchef
.RI [ OPTION... ]
.
.SH OPTION
.PP
.BR -h ,
.BR --help ,
.B --usage
    Show help.
.PP
.BR -v ,
.B --version
    Print the version.
.PP
.BR -d ,
.B --verbosity
.IR all | info | error | nothing
.BR ( default:
.IB info )
    Set the output logging verbosity.
.PP
.B --verbose
    Log everything.
.PP
.B --config
.I FILE
    Load
.I FILE
as configuration file.
.PP
.BR -e ,
.B --command
.I ARGUMENT...
    Run a command within fensterchef.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Fensterchef is the original fensterchef product.  You are presented with an X11
tiling window manager offering support for floating, fullscreen, dock and
desktop windows with full EWMH support.
.PP
For a detailed guide, see
.IR https://fensterchef.org/wm.html .
.PP
For all configuration options, see the the supplied configuration file at
.IR /usr/share/fensterchef/wm .
Create a copy of this file at
.I ~/.config/fensterchef/wm
and look through the options.
All configuration options are explained at
.BR fensterchef (5).
.
.SH SETUP
Setting up fensterchef depends on whether you are using a display manager or
not.

If this is the case, configure your display manager to set the window manager or
edit
.I ~/.xsessionrc
and add:
.EX
exec fensterchef
.EE
.PP
Without a display manager, you can instead edit
.IR ~/.xinitrc .
.
.SH TERMINOLOGY
.SS Monitor
A monitor is a sub region of the screen, this would be your output devices.
.SS Window
A window is what you would expect: A rectangular region on the screen displaying
a bar, desktop icons, your browser, a terminal and so on.

The "current window" refers to the window that is currently in focus.
.SS Frame
A frame is also a rectangular region on the screen.
It is the core of the tiling.
Each monitor has a root frame that can be split into as many frames as you like.
A frame may be empty or hold onto a window.

The "current frame" refers to the frame that is selected.
This may also be a group of frames in case you moved to a parent frame.
.SS Stash
The stash is a stack that holds onto frames in the background.
Whenever you remove a frame from the screen, the frame is put into the stash.
When splitting a frame (and having
.B auto fill void
configure set to true) frames are popped from the stash.
.SS Window list
The window list can be opened with (default modifier)
.RB + W
by default and is
.I the
way to show hidden windows.
There are other ways to show hidden windows through relations, see
.BR fensterchef (5).

When the window list is open, use the arrow keys or home row keys to navigate
through the windows, then press
.B Return
to show the selected window.
Use
.B Escape
or
.B q
to quit the window list.
.PP
Specific ascii characters are shown to indicate what the window is up to.
It can be a one of these:
.PP
.B *
the window is focused
.PP
.B +
the window is a visible tiling window
.PP
.B -
the window is hidden
.PP
.B =
the window is a visible floating window
.PP
.B F
the window is a visible fullscreen window
.PP
Only windows that can receive focus are shown in the window list.
.
.SH DEFAULT BINDING
.PP
Use the the modifier key (default is
.B Mod4
which is usually
.BR Super_L )
together with any binding.
.PP
.B LeftButton
    Start moving/resizing the pressed window, this figures out dynamically which
    edge to move.
.PP
    Use this without a modifier to simply focus the window.
.PP
.B MiddleButton
    Minimize (hide) the pressed window.        
.PP
.B RightButton
    Start moving the pressed window.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.B R
    Reload the configuration file and parts of fensterchef.
.PP
.B A
    Focus the parent frame.
.PP
.B B
    Focus the child frame.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.B A
    Focus the root frame.
.PP
.B Q
    Close the current window.
.PP
.B - (minus)
    Minimize (hide) the current window.
.PP
.B N
    Put the next window into the current frame.
.PP
.B P
    Put the previous window into the current frame.
.PP
.B R
    Remove the current frame.
.PP
.B O
    Replace the current frame with the last stashed frame.
.PP
.B Space
    Move the focus from tiling to floating and vise versa.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.B Space
    Make a tiling window floating and vise versa.
.PP
.B F
    Put the current window into fullscreen or put it out of fullscreen.
.PP
.B V
    Split the current frame horizontally.
.PP
.B S
    Split the current frame vertically.
.PP
.BR K / Up
    Move the focus to the frame above the current frame.
.PP
.BR H / Left
    Move the focus to the frame on the left of the current frame.
.PP
.BR L / Right
    Move the focus to the frame on the right of the current frame.
.PP
.BR J / Down
    Move the focus to the frame below the current frame.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.BR K / Up
    Swap the current frame with the frame above it.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.BR H / Left
    Swap the current frame with the frame on the left of it.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.BR L / Right
    Swap the current frame with the frame on the right of it.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.BR J / Down
    Swap the current frame with the frame below it.
.PP
.B W
    Show the interactive window list.
.PP
.B Return
    Open a terminal window.
.PP
.B Control
+
.B Shift
+
.B E
    Quit fensterchef.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
If the user quits, the exit status is
.BR 0 .
Otherwise it is
.BR 1 .
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
.BR fensterchef (5)
.PP
.I https://fensterchef.org
